# Stable Bubbles
## Effect of surfactant concentration on the critical thicknesses of liquid films [:material-pdf-box:](https://doi.org/10.1007/BF01558157){:target="_blank"}

Experimental study, Main finding is that a decreased concentration in surfactant increases the critical thickness (more surfactant will allow formation of thinner bubbles) up to a point, where the critical thickness stays constant even at increased concentrations. **Note: this is the CMC, a known characteristic of surfactants, but the paper doesn't mention it anywhere (although oldest mention I could find of the CMC was 1971)**. Link between critical thickness and formation of black spots. With detergent type surfactants, black spots will appear on the bubble before it bursts, whereas other types will spontaneously rupture.

??? note "Citation"
    Manev E, Scheludko A, Exerowa D. Effect of surfactant concentration on the critical thicknesses of liquid films. Colloid Polym Sci Kolloid Zeitschrift Zeitschrift für Polym. 1974;252(7–8):586–93. Available from: https://doi.org/10.1007/BF01558157


## Surface tension of flowing soap films [:material-pdf-box:](https://doi.org/10.1017/jfm.2018.28){:target="_blank"}

State that usual experimental methods for surface tensions estimation can't be used in this situation: some require a bulk liquid (which aren't indicative of their thin film counterparts), some rely on meniscus formation (in which the surface chemistry varies drastically - NOT CITED), and some rely on the insertion of deformable objects (can't be used as film has a velocity).

Propose and test a way of measuring the surface tension of a 2D flow approximating flowing soap film channel setup: Use the fact that this uses two nylon wires tensioned by a known weight to record their deflections and extract a value for surface tension.

Only really use 3 concentrations of surfactants (by volume), that's not enough imo. But the method is pretty cool.

Finds that increased thickness and soap concentration will decrease surface tension.

??? note "Citation"
    Sane A, Mandre S, Kim I. Surface tension of flowing soap films. J Fluid Mech [Internet]. 2018 Feb 20;841. Available from: http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/jfm.2018.28


## Effect of soluble surfactant on bubble persistence and bubble-produced aerosol particles [:material-pdf-box:](https://doi.org/10.1002/jgrd.50186){:target="_blank"}

Study the aerosol production dynamics and mechanisms, in particular with sea water bubbles. Aim to get a better understanding and develop more accurate models that describe these behaviours as current ones 'differ by up to 1-2 orders of magnitude'.

Bubbles bursting will generate 'film drops' (very thin mist), and the collapse of the bubble cavity can lead to the formation of an upward moving jet of water which breaks up into 'jet drops'. More focused on study of 'film drops' generated by millimetric bubbles. Carry out experiments on single bubbles, controlling surfactant concentration (and therefore film pressure), as this varied the bubble persistence time, which itself determines the bubble film cap thickness (Lhuissier and Villermaux, 2012).

> Soluble surfactants stabilize bubbles allowing them to persist at the surface longer. However, insoluble, monolayer-forming surfactants will only have this effect when present in small concentrations.

*Experimental setup is baller as fuck, seems very thorough. They dude use the Wilhelmy-plate measurment method, which uses measurments on the meniscus, which was criticised by Sane A, Mandre S, Kim I. (2018) because they believe they have drastically different surface chemistry. Looks like they're wrong, can't find anything that corroborates that*

**This paper also notes the deviation from the Taylor-Culick velocity, they attribute it to the liquid mass gain along the rim of the opening hole.** Unfortunately, it looks like they the Taylor-Culick relationship to extract film thickness from measured velocities.

Their results agree with the scaling law established by Lhuissier and Villermaux, which links bubble film cap thickness over time, taking into account marginal regeneration.

*Really likes to cite the Bursting bubble aerosol production paper by Lhuissier...*

??? note "Citation"
    Modini RL, Russell LM, Deane GB, Stokes MD. Effect of soluble surfactant on bubble persistence and bubble-produced aerosol particles. J Geophys Res Atmos [Internet]. 2013 Feb 12;118(3):1388–400. Available from: http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/jgrd.50186


## Life and death of not so "bare" bubbles [:material-pdf-box:](https://doi.org/10.1039/c6sm00178e){:target="_blank"}

How drainage and rupture of soap bubbles depends on surfactant concentration. Study concentrations way above CMC. Oberve hole nucleation point also depends on concentration. They believe **marginal regeneration** is the reason.

Impact of bubble bursting in beverage consumption. Pretty good overview of knowledge on what marginal regeneration is, what causes it.Show that marginal regeneration occurs regardless of the surfactant concentration used.

Come up with bubble **fragility**: how sensitive they are to external perturbations (like solid objects, or dust). Carry out experiment and observe that bubbles with dilute concentrations (<0.8cmc) would burst upon contact with objects. Whereas for c=cmc and above, object would penetrate without damage.

Also seems to find a link between hole nucleation point and surfactant concentration. 

??? note "Citation"
    Champougny L, Roché M, Drenckhan W, Rio E. Life and death of not so “bare” bubbles. Soft Matter [Internet]. 2016;12(24):5276–84. Available from: http://dx.doi.org/10.1039/c6sm00178e


## Transient structures in rupturing thin films: Marangoni-induced symmetry-breaking pattern formation in viscous fluids [:material-pdf-box:](https://doi.org/10.1126/sciadv.abb0597){:target="_blank"}
Before a rupture event, black spots (Newtonian black films) appear with a certain structure. These undergo a "coarsening" process where they grow in size by merging, until one big area forms before the bubble bursts. These structures are drastically different for convex and concave bubbles (looking at the top or bottom hemispheres of the film). This paper goes through the creation and development of a model capable of describing these structures (not using Navier-Stokes but field something something).

??? note "Citation"
    Shen L, Denner F, Morgan N, Van Wachem B, Dini D. Transient structures in rupturing thin films: Marangoni-induced symmetry-breaking pattern formation in viscous fluids. Sci Adv. 2020;6(28):1–11. Available from: https://doi.org/10.1126/sciadv.abb0597

## Merging of soap bubbles and why surfactant matters [:material-pdf-box:](https://doi.org/10.1063/1.5135764){:target="_blank"}
Experimental study, look at processes observed when 2 soap bubbles merge, in particular what happens just before the merge occurs. First they are created using surfactant solution at CMC, brought closer to each other, they coalesce and share a flat film surface. Initially right before coalescence, as they approach each other, a dimple is formed between them (trapped gas pocket), they then meet at a point which, grows radially due to surface tension), although that liquid bridge is initially smooth and circular, its extreme acceleration and the fact that it will travel faster in the area of the dimple, will cause the rim to become modulated and unstable and leave behind structures like radial streaks (**Rayleigh–Taylor
instability**). They develop a model to describe this behaviour.

- [++] repeatable: made sure the bubbles weren't charged (controlled it using copper wire)
- [++] repeated experiment 50 times

??? note "Citation"
    Pfeiffer P, Zeng Q, Tan BH, Ohl C-D. Merging of soap bubbles and why surfactant matters. Appl Phys Lett [Internet]. 2020 Mar 9;116(10):103702. Available from: http://doi.org/10.1063/1.5135764

## Thermal Convection and Emergence of Isolated Vortices in Soap Bubbles [:material-pdf-box:](http://dx.doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.100.144501){:target="_blank"}
Looking at similarities between fluid structures observed in thin film interference and macro effects like tornadoes??

??? note "Citation"
    Seychelles F, Amarouchene Y, Bessafi M, Kellay H. Thermal convection and emergence of isolated vortices in soap bubbles. Phys Rev Lett. 2008;100(14). Available from: http://dx.doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.100.144501


## Interfacial mechanisms for stability of surfactant-laden films [:material-pdf-box:](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0175753){:target="_blank"}
*Has really cool images and figures, could use!*

Carry out thinning experiments to quantify the slowing effect of surfactants on gravity-driven drainage. Looking at the difference between soluble and insoluble surfactants.

**Explain marginal regeneration** by saying that surface-tension gradient driven plumes have an increased surface area near the top, meaning surfactant concentration is locally decreased, and surface tension therefore is increased. This area of high surface tension will cause liquid to be pulled up from the bulk liquid at the bubble's. That liquid has a lower surfactant concentration (as surfactant molecules **adsorb??** at the surface), this reduces surfactant conc of bubble which destabilises and leads to bursting.

Find that for both soluble and insoluble surfactant, adding it does increase the stability of the thin film.

Find that Marangoni flows act to stabilise the film significantly, above and below the CMC for soluble surfactant laden films.

For the insoluble surfactant laden films, see that at low surface pressure, "marginal regeneration" is observed: Initially the bubble has circular fringe patterns, exemplifying a symmetric thickness profile for the bubble. However after t < 2, plumes of surfactant are seen rising from the base of the bubble, these are driven by surface-tension gradients (Marangoni). After CMC, this doesn't happen tho and the film.

At high surface pressure with insoluble, stability is achieved through "interfacial rheology", resulting in immobile surfaces.

> It is worth noting that for the solutions above the cmc, we also observe formation of black films before rupture (soluble surfactant)

??? note "Citation"
    Bhamla MS, Chai C, Àlvarez-Valenzuela MA, Tajuelo J, Fuller GG (2017) Interfacial mechanisms for stability of surfactant-laden films. PLOS ONE 12(5): e0175753. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0175753


## Marginal Regeneration and the Marangoni Effect [:material-pdf-box:](https://doi.org/10.1006/jcis.1999.6226){:target="_blank"}
Looking at vertical thin films. *FIG 1 would be pretty good to show marginal regeneration*.

A localized zone of high surface tension, will contract and reduce its surface area, lowering its surface tension until it reaches a mechanical equilibrium with its surroundings. "This effect is responsible for the characteristic rapid, swirling motions that are often seen in thin films"

If only a small surface tension gradient appears, or the relaxation to the equilibrium is too fast (diffusion coefficient), then marginal regeneration will not happen, and the only film thinning mechanisms which remains is the slow Poiseuille flow between the immobilized film surfaces.

Essentially finds the same results as Bhamla MS et al 2017

??? note "Citation"
    Vincent Adriaan Nierstrasz, Gert Frens, Marginal Regeneration and the Marangoni Effect, Journal of Colloid and Interface Science, Volume 215, Issue 1,1999, Pages 28-35, ISSN 0021-9797, https://doi.org/10.1006/jcis.1999.6226.


## "Young" Soap Films [:material-pdf-box:](https://doi.org/10.1021/la001538l){:target="_blank"}
Looking at Flat films made by rapidly pulling a rectangular metallic frame out of a surfactant containing solution. Setting up equations regarding solution concentration and surface concentration of surfactant.

Mentions `Langmuir Pressure`, which is also called surface or film pressure by others.

Weight of film must be balanced by Marangoni forces. Assumes a fast equilibration between solution and surface (monolayer) surfactant concentration. **Adsorption of surfactant molecules happen very quickly at very low c << c\***. Looking at the thickness distribution from base to height (assuming 2D).

At CMC, most of the surfactant molecules have aggregated into micelles, and only a few remain as "monomers", alone on the surface. Goes into detail about the breakup of these micelles, when the free surface lacks surfactant molecules, and their associated characteristic times.

Gives what surfactant properties are best to provide the most stable film.

- Need high surface pressures -> the surfactant must have an aliphatic tail that isn't too short.
- Need fast movement of surfactant molecules to the boundary (diffusion time) -> need the CMC to be relatively small, and surfactant tails not too long (corresponds to an HLB number from 7-9)

??? note "Citation"
    de Gennes PG. “Young” Soap Films. Langmuir [Internet]. 2001 Apr;17(8):2416–9. Available from: http://dx.doi.org/10.1021/la001538l


## Laboratory Measurement of Water Surface Bubble Life Time [:material-pdf-box:](https://doi.org/10.1029/JC088iC01p00701){:target="_blank"}
Statistically analyse the bubble lifetimes based on size. Find that:

> the total average of life times of various sizes for tap water is 2. 24 s, it is 2. 98 s for Delaware Bay water, and 3. 89 s for Atlantic Ocean water, respectively

??? note "Citation"
     Zheng QA, Klemas V, Hsu Y-HL. Laboratory measurement of water surface bubble life time. J Geophys Res [Internet]. 1983;88(C1):701. Available from: http://dx.doi.org/10.1029/JC088iC01p00701


## The drainage of a foam lamella [:material-pdf-box:](https://doi.org/10.1017/S0022112002007930){:target="_blank"}
Develop mathematical model for describing the drainage mechanisms for soap films, including capillary, Marangoni and viscous effects, and considering all movement of surfactant molecules (diffusion, advection and adsorption). Start first with looking at "bare" film. Call pinching a "dimple" near the Plateau border. Find an increase in flux from film down to Plateau when film becomes thinner.

Breaks down the drainage in three sections: Away from the border, a flat film which follow viscous drainage, a "capillary-static" (flow is slow enough that curvature can be assumed constant) drainage flow at the Plateau border, and an intermediary transition region between both. Assume that the film has a material property hrup (rupture).

When the film becomes so thin that intermolecular interactions between both free surfaces (bilayer) become significant, a balance can be reached with the capillary suction. *Black film thickness e-9 - e-8*.

??? note "Citation"
    BREWARD CJW, HOWELL PD. The drainage of a foam lamella. J Fluid Mech [Internet]. 2002 May 10;458:379–406. Available from: http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/S0022112002007930


## Models for gravitationally-driven free-film drainage [:material-pdf-box:](https://doi.org/10.1023/A:1020320404339){:target="_blank"}

Static meniscus region can be taken as analogous to a Plateau border (in foams and bubbles that are stuck together).

Criticised Neirstrasz's model for assuming constant solute concentration in the Plateau border (Nierstrasz1999)

??? note "Citation"
    Braun, R., Snow, S. & Naire, S. Models for gravitationally-driven free-film drainage. Journal of Engineering Mathematics 43, 281–314 (2002). https://doi.org/10.1023/A:1020320404339


## Stability of Soap Films: Hysteresis and Nucleation of Black Films [:material-pdf-box:](https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.90.048302){:target="_blank"}

Depending on capillary pressure, either a thick common black film or a newton black film will appear. Both are metastable equilibrium states. Observe a hysteresis effect in the transition between CBF and NBF, where for a range of pressures, either of the two films could be observed.

??? note "Citation"
    Casteletto V, Cantat I, Sarker D, Bausch R, Bonn D, Meunier J. Stability of soap films: hysteresis and nucleation of black films. Phys Rev Lett. 2003 Jan 30;90(4):048302.
