# Characteristics and Fundamental Interactions
## Effect of surfactant concentration on the critical thicknesses of liquid films [:material-pdf-box:](https://doi.org/10.1007/BF01558157){:target="_blank"}

Experimental study, Main finding is that a decreased concentration in surfactant increases the critical thickness (more surfactant will allow formation of thinner bubbles) up to a point, where the critical thickness stays constant even at increased concentrations. **Note: this is the CMC, a known characteristic of surfactants, but the paper doesn't mention it anywhere (although oldest mention I could find of the CMC was 1971)**. Link between critical thickness and formation of black spots. With detergent type surfactants, black spots will appear on the bubble before it bursts, whereas other types will spontaneously rupture.

??? note "Citation"
    Manev E, Scheludko A, Exerowa D. Effect of surfactant concentration on the critical thicknesses of liquid films. Colloid Polym Sci Kolloid Zeitschrift Zeitschrift für Polym. 1974;252(7–8):586–93. Available from: https://doi.org/10.1007/BF01558157


## Surface tension of flowing soap films [:material-pdf-box:](https://doi.org/10.1017/jfm.2018.28){:target="_blank"}

State that usual experimental methods for surface tensions estimation can't be used in this situation: some require a bulk liquid (which aren't indicative of their thin film counterparts), some rely on meniscus formation (in which the surface chemistry varies drastically - NOT CITED), and some rely on the insertion of deformable objects (can't be used as film has a velocity).

Propose and test a way of measuring the surface tension of a 2D flow approximating flowing soap film channel setup: Use the fact that this uses two nylon wires tensioned by a known weight to record their deflections and extract a value for surface tension.

Only really use 3 concentrations of surfactants (by volume), that's not enough imo. But the method is pretty cool.

Finds that increased thickness and soap concentration will decrease surface tension.

??? note "Citation"
    Sane A, Mandre S, Kim I. Surface tension of flowing soap films. J Fluid Mech [Internet]. 2018 Feb 20;841. Available from: http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/jfm.2018.28


## Effect of soluble surfactant on bubble persistence and bubble-produced aerosol particles [:material-pdf-box:](https://doi.org/10.1002/jgrd.50186){:target="_blank"}

Study the aerosol production dynamics and mechanisms, in particular with sea water bubbles. Aim to get a better understanding and develop more accurate models that describe these behaviours as current ones 'differ by up to 1-2 orders of magnitude'.

Bubbles bursting will generate 'film drops' (very thin mist), and the collapse of the bubble cavity can lead to the formation of an upward moving jet of water which breaks up into 'jet drops'. More focused on study of 'film drops' generated by millimetric bubbles. Carry out experiments on single bubbles, controlling surfactant concentration (and therefore film pressure), as this varied the bubble persistence time, which itself determines the bubble film cap thickness (Lhuissier and Villermaux, 2012).

> Soluble surfactants stabilize bubbles allowing them to persist at the surface longer. However, insoluble, monolayer-forming surfactants will only have this effect when present in small concentrations.

*Experimental setup is baller as fuck, seems very thorough. They dude use the Wilhelmy-plate measurment method, which uses measurments on the meniscus, which was criticised by Sane A, Mandre S, Kim I. (2018) because they believe they have drastically different surface chemistry. Looks like they're wrong, can't find anything that corroborates that*

**This paper also notes the deviation from the Taylor-Culick velocity, they attribute it to the liquid mass gain along the rim of the opening hole.** Unfortunately, it looks like they the Taylor-Culick relationship to extract film thickness from measured velocities.

Their results agree with the scaling law established by Lhuissier and Villermaux, which links bubble film cap thickness over time, taking into account marginal regeneration.

*Really likes to cite the Bursting bubble aerosol production paper by Lhuissier...*

??? note "Citation"
    Modini RL, Russell LM, Deane GB, Stokes MD. Effect of soluble surfactant on bubble persistence and bubble-produced aerosol particles. J Geophys Res Atmos [Internet]. 2013 Feb 12;118(3):1388–400. Available from: http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/jgrd.50186
    

## Life and death of not so "bare" bubbles [:material-pdf-box:](https://doi.org/10.1039/c6sm00178e){:target="_blank"}

How drainage and rupture of soap bubbles depends on surfactant concentration. Study concentrations way above CMC. Oberve hole nucleation point also depends on concentration. They believe **marginal regeneration** is the reason.

Impact of bubble bursting in beverage consumption. Pretty good overview of knowledge on what marginal regeneration is, what causes it.Show that marginal regeneration occurs regardless of the surfactant concentration used.

Come up with bubble **fragility**: how sensitive they are to external perturbations (like solid objects, or dust). Carry out experiment and observe that bubbles with dilute concentrations (<0.8cmc) would burst upon contact with objects. Whereas for c=cmc and above, object would penetrate without damage.

??? note "Citation"
    Champougny L, Roché M, Drenckhan W, Rio E. Life and death of not so “bare” bubbles. Soft Matter [Internet]. 2016;12(24):5276–84. Available from: http://dx.doi.org/10.1039/c6sm00178e
